Agner Krarup Erlang

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search

                Agner Krarup Erlang
Erlang.jpg
   Born    1 January 1878 (1878-01)
           Lønborg, Denmark
   Died    3 February 1929 (1929-02-04) (aged 51)
           Copenhagen, Denmark
Occupation Mathematician, statistician, and engineer

Agner Krarup Erlang (1 January 1878 – 3 February 1929) was a Danish
mathematician, statistician and engineer, who invented the fields of traffic
engineering and queueing theory.

By the time of his relatively early death at the age of 51, Erlang had created
the field of telephone networks analysis. His early work in scrutinizing the
use of local, exchange and trunk telephone line usage in a small community to
understand the theoretical requirements of an efficient network led to the
creation of the Erlang formula, which became a foundational element of
present-day telecommunication network studies.

Contents

  • 1 Life
  • 2 Contributions
  • 3 See also
  • 4 References
  • 5 External links

Life[edit]

Erlang was born at Lønborg, near Tarm, in Jutland. He was the son of a
schoolmaster, and a descendant of Thomas Fincke on his mother's side. At age
14, he passed the Preliminary Examination of the University of Copenhagen with
distinction, after receiving dispensation to take it because he was younger
than the usual minimum age. For the next two years he taught alongside his
father.

A distant relative provided free board and lodging, and Erlang prepared for and
took the University of Copenhagen entrance examination in 1896, and passed with
distinction. He won a scholarship to the University and majored in mathematics,
and also studied astronomy, physics and chemistry. He graduated in 1901 with an
MA and over the next 7 years taught at several schools. He maintained his
interest in mathematics, and received an award for a paper that he submitted to
the University of Copenhagen.

He was a member of the Danish Mathematicians' Association (TBMI) and through
this met amateur mathematician Johan Jensen, the Chief Engineer of the
Copenhagen Telephone Company (KTAS in Danish), an offshoot of the International
Bell Telephone Company. Erlang worked for the CTC (KTAS) from 1908 for almost
20 years, until his death in Copenhagen after an abdominal operation.

He was an associate of the British Institution of Electrical Engineers.

Contributions[edit]

While working for the CTC, Erlang was presented with the classic problem of
determining how many circuits were needed to provide an acceptable telephone
service. His thinking went further by finding how many telephone operators were
needed to handle a given volume of calls. Most telephone exchanges then used
human operators and cord boards to switch telephone calls by means of jack
plugs.

Out of necessity, Erlang was a hands-on researcher. He would conduct
measurements and was prepared to climb into street manholes to do so. He was
also an expert in the history and calculation of the numerical tables of
mathematical functions, particularly logarithms. He devised new calculation
methods for certain forms of tables.

He developed his theory of telephone traffic over several years. His
significant publications include:

  • In 1909 - "The Theory of Probabilities and Telephone Conversations" - which
    proves that the Poisson distribution applies to random telephone traffic.
  • In 1917 - "Solution of some Problems in the Theory of Probabilities of
    Significance in Automatic Telephone Exchanges" - which contains his classic
    formulae for call loss and waiting time.

These and other notable papers were translated into English, French and German.
His papers were prepared in a very brief style and can be difficult to
understand without a background in the field. One researcher from Bell
Telephone Laboratories is said to have learned Danish to study them.

The British Post Office accepted his formula as the basis for calculating
circuit facilities.

A unit of measurement, statistical distribution and programming language listed
below have been named in his honour.

See also[edit]

  • Erlang – a unit of communication activity
  • Erlang distribution – a statistical probability distribution
  • Erlang programming language – developed by Ericsson for large industrial
    real-time systems
  • Queueing theory
  • Teletraffic engineering

References[edit]

Notes

       This article includes a list of references, related reading or external
       links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations.
[40px] Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise
       citations. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template
       message)

Bibliography

  • Angus, Ian. An Introduction to Erlang B and Erlang C (PDF Document – Has
    terms and formulae plus biography)
  • Brockmeyer, E., Halstrøm, H.L. & Jensen, Arne. "The Life and Works of A.K.
    Erlang", (Collected works of A. K. Erlang)
  • O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Agner Krarup Erlang", MacTutor
    History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .
  • Plus Magazine. Agner Krarup Erlang (1878–1929), Plus Magazine online,
    University of Cambridge, U.K., May 1997. Retrieved 22 November 2009

External links[edit]

  • Erlang Distribution
  • "Telefon-Ventetider. Et Stykke Sandsynlighedsregning", in Matematisk
    Tidsskrift, B, 1920 (a paper on telephone waiting times, in Danish,
    digitized by Project Runeberg)

                    • WorldCat Identities
                    • VIAF: 184427501
Authority control   • ISNI: 0000 0003 5638 2899
                    • GND: 1014009553
                    • SELIBR: 185883

*
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agner_Krarup_Erlang&
oldid=742753152"
Categories:

  • 20th-century mathematicians
  • Danish engineers
  • Electrical engineers
  • Queueing theorists
  • Danish mathematicians
  • Danish statisticians
  • Danish business theorists
  • 1878 births
  • 1929 deaths

Hidden categories:

  • Articles with hCards
  • Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2009
  • All articles lacking in-text citations
  • Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers

Navigation menu

Personal tools

  • Not logged in
  • Talk
  • Contributions
  • Create account
  • Log in

Namespaces

  • Article
  • Talk

Variants 

Views

  • Read
  • Edit
  • View history

More 

Search

[                    ][Search][Go]
 

Navigation

  • Main page
  • Contents
  • Featured content
  • Current events
  • Random article
  • Donate to Wikipedia
  • Wikipedia store

Interaction

  • Help
  • About Wikipedia
  • Community portal
  • Recent changes
  • Contact page

Tools

  • What links here
  • Related changes
  • Upload file
  • Special pages
  • Permanent link
  • Page information
  • Wikidata item
  • Cite this page

Print/export

  • Create a book
  • Download as PDF
  • Printable version

Languages

  • Català
  • Dansk
  • Deutsch
  • Español
  • Français
  • Italiano
  • עברית
  • Malagasy
  • Nederlands
  • 日本語
  • Norsk bokmål
  • Polski
  • Português
  • Русский
  • Slovenščina
  • Svenska
  •  

Edit links

  • This page was last modified on 5 October 2016, at 15:47.
  • Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
     ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms
    of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the
    Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  • Privacy policy
  • About Wikipedia
  • Disclaimers
  • Contact Wikipedia
  • Developers
  • Cookie statement
  • Mobile view

  • Wikimedia Foundation
  • Powered by MediaWiki

