Stefan Banach

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search

                             Stefan Banach
عالم الرياضيات البولندى ستيفان بناخ.jpg
                       (1892-03-30)March 30, 1892
         Born          Kraków, Grand Duchy of Kraków, Austria-Hungary
                       (today Poland)
         Died          August 31, 1945(1945-08-31) (aged 53)
                       Lviv, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union (today Ukraine)
     Nationality       Polish
        Fields         Mathematics
     Institutions      University of Lwów
      Alma mater       Technical University of Lwów
   Doctoral advisor    Hugo Steinhaus
  Doctoral students    Stanisław Mazur
Other notable students Stanislaw Ulam
                       Banach–Tarski paradox
      Known for        Banach–Steinhaus theorem
                       Functional analysis
                       Memberships:
    Notable awards     Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian SSR,
                       Polish Academy of Learning

Stefan Banach ([ˈstɛfan ˈbanax] (● listen); 30 March 1892 – 31 August 1945) was
a Polish mathematician who is generally considered one of the world's most
important and influential 20th-century mathematicians. He was one of the
founders of modern functional analysis, and an original member of the Lwów
School of Mathematics. His major work was the 1932 book, Théorie des opérations
linéaires (Theory of Linear Operations), the first monograph on the general
theory of functional analysis.

Born in Kraków, Banach attended IV Gymnasium, a secondary school, and worked on
mathematics problems with his friend Witold Wilkosz. After graduating in 1910,
Banach moved to Lwów. However, during World War I Banach returned to Kraków,
where he befriended Hugo Steinhaus. After Banach solved some mathematics
problems which Steinhaus considered difficult, they published their first joint
work. In 1919, with several other mathematicians, Banach formed a mathematical
society. In 1920 he received an assistantship at the Lwów Polytechnic.

He soon became a professor at the Lwów Polytechnic, and a member of the Polish
Academy of Learning. He organized the "Lwów School of Mathematics". Around 1929
he began writing his Théorie des opérations linéaires.

After the outbreak of World War II, in September 1939, Lwów was taken over by
the Soviet Union. Banach became a member of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
and was dean of Lwów University's Department of Mathematics and Physics.

In 1941, when the Germans took over Lwów, all institutions of higher education
were closed to Poles. As a result, Banach was forced to earn a living as a
feeder of lice at Rudolf Weigl's Institute for Study of Typhus and Virology.
While the job carried the risk of infection with typhus, it protected him from
being sent to slave labor in Germany and from other forms of repression. When
the Soviets recaptured Lwów in 1944, Banach reestablished the University.
However, because the Soviets were removing Poles from Soviet-annexed
formerly-Polish territories, Banach prepared to return to Kraków. Before he
could do so, he died in August 1945, having been diagnosed seven months earlier
with lung cancer.

Some of the notable mathematical concepts that bear Banach's name include
Banach spaces, Banach algebras, the Banach–Tarski paradox, the Hahn–Banach
theorem, the Banach–Steinhaus theorem, the Banach-Mazur game, the
Banach–Alaoglu theorem, and the Banach fixed-point theorem.

Contents

  • 1 Life
      □ 1.1 Early life
      □ 1.2 Discovery by Steinhaus
      □ 1.3 Interbellum
      □ 1.4 World War II
  • 2 Contributions
  • 3 Quotes
  • 4 See also
  • 5 Notes
  • 6 References
  • 7 External links

Life[edit]

Early life[edit]

Stefan Banach was born on 30 March 1892 at St. Lazarus General Hospital in
Kraków, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Banach's parents were Stefan
Greczek and Katarzyna Banach, both natives of the Podhale region.^[1] Greczek
was a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian Army stationed in Kraków. Little is known
about Banach's mother.^[2]

Unusually, Stefan's surname was that of his mother instead of his father,
though he received his father's given name, Stefan. Since Stefan Greczek was a
private and was prevented by military regulations from marrying, and the mother
was too poor to support the child, the couple decided that he should be reared
by family and friends.^[3] Stefan spent the first few years of his life with
his grandmother, but when she took ill Greczek arranged for his son to be
raised by Franciszka Płowa and her niece Maria Puchalska in Kraków. Young
Stefan would regard Franciszka as his foster mother and Maria as his older
sister.^[4] In his early years Banach was tutored by Juliusz Mien, a French
intellectual and friend of the Płowa family, who had emigrated to Poland and
supported himself with photography and translations of Polish literature into
French. Mien taught Banach French and most likely encouraged him in his early
mathematical pursuits.^[5]

In 1902 Banach, aged 10, enrolled in Kraków's IV Gymnasium (also known as the
Goetz Gymnasium). While the school specialized in the humanities, Banach and
his best friend Witold Wiłkosz (also a future mathematician) spent most of
their time working on mathematics problems during breaks and after school.^[6]
Later in life Banach would credit Dr. Kamil Kraft, the mathematics and physics
teacher at the gymnasium with kindling his interests in mathematics.^[7] While
generally Banach was a diligent student he did on occasion receive low grades
(he failed Greek during his first semester at the gymnasium) and would later
speak critically of the school's math teachers.^[8]

After obtaining his matura (high school degree) at age 18 in 1910, Banach moved
to Lwów with the intention of studying at the Lwów Polytechnic. He initially
chose engineering as his field of study since at the time he was convinced that
there was nothing new to discover in mathematics.^[9] At some point he also
attended Jagiellonian University in Kraków on a part-time basis. As Banach had
to earn money to support his studies it was not until 1914 that he finally, at
age 22, passed his high school graduation exams.^[10]

When World War I broke out, Banach was excused from military service due to his
left-handedness and poor vision. When the Russian Army opened its offensive
toward Lwów, Banach left for Kraków, where he spent the rest of the war. He
made his living as a tutor at the local gymnasiums, worked in a bookstore and
as a foreman of road building crew. He attended some lectures at the
Jagiellonian University at that time, including those of the famous Polish
mathematicians Stanisław Zaremba and Kazimierz Żorawski, but little is known of
that period of his life.^[11]

Discovery by Steinhaus[edit]

[220px-Otto_Nikodym_Stefan_Bana]
 
Otto Nikodym and Stefan Banach Memorial Bench in Kraków, Poland (sculpted by
Stefan Dousa)

In 1916, in Kraków's Planty gardens, Banach encountered Professor Hugo
Steinhaus, one of the renowned mathematicians of the time. According to
Steinhaus, while he was strolling through the gardens he was surprised to
overhear the term "Lebesgue integral" (Lebesgue integration was at the time
still a fairly new idea in mathematics) and walked over to investigate. As a
result, he met Banach, as well as Otto Nikodym.^[12] Steinhaus became
fascinated with the self-taught young mathematician. The encounter resulted in
a long-lasting collaboration and friendship. In fact, soon after the encounter
Steinhaus invited Banach to solve some problems he had been working on but
which had proven difficult. Banach solved them within a week and the two soon
published their first joint work (On the Mean Convergence of Fourier Series).
Steinhaus, Banach and Nikodym, along with several other Kraków mathematicians (
Władysław Ślebodziński, Leon Chwistek, Alfred Rosenblatt and Włodzimierz Stożek
) also established a mathematical society, which eventually became the Polish
Mathematical Society.^[13] The society was officially founded on April 2, 1919.
It was also through Steinhaus that Banach met his future wife, Łucja Braus.

Interbellum[edit]

[200px-Lwow_-_Kawiarnia_Szko]
 
Scottish Café, meeting place of many famous Lwów mathematicians

Steinhaus introduced Banach to academic circles and substantially accelerated
his career. After Poland regained independence, in 1920 Banach was given an
assistantship at the Lwów Polytechnic. Steinhaus' backing also allowed him to
receive a doctorate without actually graduating from a university. The doctoral
thesis, accepted by King John II Casimir University of Lwów in 1920 ^[14] and
published in 1922,^[15] included the basic ideas of functional analysis, which
was soon to become an entirely new branch of mathematics. The thesis was widely
discussed in academic circles and allowed him in 1922 to become a professor at
the Lwów Polytechnic. Initially an assistant to Professor Antoni Łomnicki, in
1927 Banach received his own chair. In 1924 he was also accepted as a member of
the Polish Academy of Learning. At the same time, from 1922, Banach also headed
the second Chair of Mathematics at University of Lwów.

Young and talented, Banach gathered around him a large group of mathematicians.
The group, meeting in the Scottish Café, soon gave birth to the "Lwów School of
Mathematics". In 1929 the group began publishing its own journal, Studia
Mathematica, devoted primarily to Banach's field of study — functional
analysis. Around that time, Banach also began working on his best-known work,
the first monograph on the general theory of linear-metric space. First
published in Polish in 1931,^[16] the following year it was also translated
into French and gained wider recognition in European academic circles.^[17] The
book was also the first in a long series of mathematics monographs edited by
Banach and his circle. In June 17, 1924 Banach become a correspondence member
of the Polish Academy of Sciences and Fine Arts in Kraków.

World War II[edit]

[200px-Cmentarz-Lyczakowski-]
 
Banach's grave, Lychakiv Cemetery, Lviv (Lwów, in Polish)

Following the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, Lwów
came under the control of the Soviet Union for almost two years. Banach, from
1939 a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, and on good
terms with Soviet mathematicians,^[2] had to promise to learn Ukrainian to be
allowed to keep his chair and continue his academic activities.^[18] Following
the German takeover of Lwów in 1941 during Operation Barbarossa, all
universities were closed and Banach, along with many colleagues and his son,
was employed as lice feeder at Professor Rudolf Weigl's Typhus Research
Institute. Employment in Weigl's Institute provided many unemployed university
professors and their associates protection from random arrest and deportation
to Nazi concentration camps.

After the Red Army recaptured Lviv in the Lvov–Sandomierz Offensive of 1944,
Banach returned to the University and helped re-establish it after the war
years. However, because the Soviets were removing Poles from annexed formerly
Polish territories, Banach began preparing to leave the city and settle in
Kraków, Poland, where he had been promised a chair at the Jagiellonian
University.^[2] He was also considered a candidate for Minister of Education of
Poland.^[19] In January 1945, however, he was diagnosed with lung cancer and
was allowed to stay in Lwów. He died on August 31, 1945, aged 53. His funeral
at the Lychakiv Cemetery was attended by hundreds of people.^[19]

Contributions[edit]

[350px-Banach-Tarski_Paradox]
 
Decomposition of a ball into two identical balls - the Banach–Tarski paradox.

Banach's dissertation, completed in 1920 and published in 1922, formally
axiomatized the concept of a complete normed vector space and laid the
foundations for the area of functional analysis. In this work Banach called
such spaces "class E-spaces", but in his 1932 book, Théorie des opérations
linéaires, he changed terminology and referred to them as "spaces of type B",
which most likely contributed to the subsequent eponymous naming of these
spaces after him.^[20] The theory of what came to be known as Banach spaces had
antecedents in the work of the Hungarian mathematician Frigyes Riesz (published
in 1916) and contemporaneous contributions from Hans Hahn and Norbert Wiener.^
[14] For a brief period in fact, complete normed linear spaces were referred to
as "Banach-Wiener" spaces in mathematical literature, based on terminology
introduced by Wiener himself. However, because Wiener's work on the topic was
limited, the established name became just Banach spaces.^[20]

Likewise, Banach's fixed point theorem, based on earlier methods developed by
Charles Émile Picard, was included in his dissertation, and was later extended
by his students (for example in the Banach–Schauder theorem) and other
mathematicians (in particular Brouwer and Poincaré and Birkhoff). The theorem
did not require linearity of the space, and applied to any Cauchy space
(complete metric space).^[14]

The Hahn–Banach theorem, is one of the fundamental theorems of functional
analysis.^[14]

  • Banach–Tarski paradox
  • Banach–Steinhaus theorem
  • Banach–Alaoglu theorem
  • Banach–Stone theorem

Quotes[edit]

[150px-Stefan_banach_]
 
Banach monument, Kraków

Stanislaw Ulam, another mathematician of the Lwów School of Mathematics, in his
autobiography, quotes Banach as saying:

    "Good mathematicians see analogies. Great mathematicians see analogies
    between analogies."

Hugo Steinhaus said of Banach:

    "An exceptional intellect, exceptional discoveries... he gave Polish
    science... more than anybody else."
    "Banach was my greatest scientific discovery."

See also[edit]

  • List of things named after Stefan Banach
  • Closed range theorem
  • Banach space
  • List of Poles

Notes[edit]

 1. ^ Waksmundzka-Hajnos 2006, p. 16
 2. ^ ^a ^b ^c O'Connor and Robertson
 3. ^ Kałuża 1996, pp. 2–4
 4. ^ Kałuża 1996, pp. 1–3
 5. ^ Kałuża 1996, p. 3
 6. ^ Kałuża 1996, p. 137
 7. ^ Jakimowicz & Miranowicz 2007, p. 4
 8. ^ Kałuża 1996, pp. 3–4
 9. ^ Jakimowicz & Miranowicz 2007, p.5
10. ^ Kałuża 1996, p. 13
11. ^ Kałuża 1996, p. 16
12. ^ Jakimowicz & Miranowicz 2007, p. 6
13. ^ Kałuża 1996, p. 23
14. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Jahnke 2003, p. 402
15. ^ Stefan Banach (1922). "Sur les opérations dans les ensembles abstraits et
    leur application aux équations integrals (On operations in the abstract
    sets and their application to integral equations)". Fundamenta Mathematicae
    (in French and Polish). 3. 
16. ^ Stefan Banach: Teoria operacji liniowych.
17. ^ Stefan Banach: Théorie des opérations linéaires (in French; Theory of
    Linear Operations).
18. ^ Urbaniak
19. ^ ^a ^b James 2003, p. 384
20. ^ ^a ^b MacCluer 2008, p. 6

References[edit]

  • Jahnke, Hans Niels (2003). A History of Analysis. American Mathematical
    Society. ISBN 0821826239. 
  • Jakimowicz, E.; Miranowicz, A., eds. (2007). Stefan Banach - Remarkable
    life, Brilliant mathematics. Gdańsk University Press and Adam Mickiewicz
    University Press. ISBN 978-83-7326-451-9. 
  • James, Ioan (2003). Remarkable Mathematicians: From Euler to von Neumann.
    Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521520940. 
  • Kałuża, Roman (1996). Through a Reporter's Eyes: The Life of Stefan Banach.
    Translated by Wojbor Andrzej Woyczyński and Ann Kostant. Birkhäuser. ISBN 
    0-8176-3772-9. 
  • Kosiedowski, Stanisław. "Stefan Banach". Mój Lwów. Retrieved 2008-05-20. 
  • O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F. (2000). "Stefan Banach". MacTutor
    History of Mathematics archive. University of St. Andrews. Retrieved August
    19, 2012. 
  • Siegmund-Schultze, Reinhard (2003). Jahnke, Hans Niels, ed. A History of
    Analysis. American Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-2623-9. 
  • MacCluer, Barbara (2008). Elementary Functional Analysis. Springer. ISBN 
    0387855289. 
  • Urbaniak, Mariusz (April 2002). "Geniusz: gen i już". Polityka. 8 (2348). 
  • Waksmundzka-Hajnos, Monika (2006). "Wspomnienie o Stefanie Greczku". Focus.
    Gdańsk University (11). 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutStefan Banachat Wikipedia's sister projects

  • ●Quotations from Wikiquote

  • Page devoted to Stefan Banach
  • Stefan Banach at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
  • Works by or about Stefan Banach in libraries (WorldCat catalog)

                    • WorldCat Identities
                    • VIAF: 4992585
                    • LCCN: n86118445
                    • ISNI: 0000 0000 8084 1061
                    • GND: 11865697X
Authority control   • SUDOC: 031635121
                    • BNF: cb12281286s (data)
                    • MGP: 12681
                    • NLA: 35728297
                    • NDL: 01030291
                    • NKC: ola2002151534

*
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stefan_Banach&oldid=
745882199"
Categories:

  • 1892 births
  • 1945 deaths
  • 20th-century Polish mathematicians
  • Soviet people
  • Members of the Lwów Scientific Society
  • Members of the Polish Academy of Learning
  • Members of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
  • Lviv Polytechnic alumni
  • Polish Gorals
  • People from Kraków
  • People from Lviv
  • Burials at Lychakiv Cemetery

Hidden categories:

  • CS1 French-language sources (fr)
  • Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers

Navigation menu

Personal tools

  • Not logged in
  • Talk
  • Contributions
  • Create account
  • Log in

Namespaces

  • Article
  • Talk

Variants 

Views

  • Read
  • Edit
  • View history

More 

Search

[                    ][Search][Go]
 

Navigation

  • Main page
  • Contents
  • Featured content
  • Current events
  • Random article
  • Donate to Wikipedia
  • Wikipedia store

Interaction

  • Help
  • About Wikipedia
  • Community portal
  • Recent changes
  • Contact page

Tools

  • What links here
  • Related changes
  • Upload file
  • Special pages
  • Permanent link
  • Page information
  • Wikidata item
  • Cite this page

Print/export

  • Create a book
  • Download as PDF
  • Printable version

In other projects

  • Wikimedia Commons
  • Wikiquote

Languages

  • العربية
  • Aragonés
  • Asturianu
  • Azərbaycanca
  • বাংলা
  • Беларуская
  • Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  • Български
  • Català
  • Чӑвашла
  • Čeština
  • Corsu
  • Cymraeg
  • Deutsch
  • Dolnoserbski
  • Español
  • Esperanto
  • Euskara
  • فارسی
  • Français
  • Frysk
  • Furlan
  • Galego
  • 한국어
  • Íslenska
  • Italiano
  • עברית
  • Қазақша
  • Latina
  • Latviešu
  • Magyar
  • Македонски
  • Malagasy
  • Монгол
  • Nederlands
  • 日本語
  • Napulitano
  • Norsk bokmål
  • Norsk nynorsk
  • Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
  • Piemontèis
  • Polski
  • Português
  • Română
  • Русский
  • Sicilianu
  • Slovenčina
  • Suomi
  • Svenska
  • Türkçe
  • Українська
  • Tiếng Việt
  • 中文
  •  

Edit links

  • This page was last modified on 23 October 2016, at 22:53.
  • Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
     ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms
    of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the
    Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  • Privacy policy
  • About Wikipedia
  • Disclaimers
  • Contact Wikipedia
  • Developers
  • Cookie statement
  • Mobile view

  • Wikimedia Foundation
  • Powered by MediaWiki

